Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
the resting membrane potential and the action potential.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
Define the resting membrane potential and explain what generates it.
The resting membrane potential is the electrical potential difference across the
membrane of an excitable cell at rest,
with the inside negative relative to the outside — about minus seventy millivolts
in a neurone, and nearer minus ninety in cardiac and skeletal muscle.
It is generated by three factors acting together.
First, the unequal distribution of ions:
potassium is high inside the cell and sodium high outside,
gradients established and maintained by the sodium-potassium pump.
Second, the membrane's selective permeability:
at rest it is far more permeable to potassium than to sodium,
through open potassium leak channels.
Third, the consequence: potassium tends to diffuse out down its concentration
gradient, leaving the interior negative,
until the electrical force pulling it back balances the chemical force pushing it
out. The pump also contributes slightly, being electrogenic.
So the resting membrane potential is the inside-negative voltage at rest,
generated by the ionic gradients maintained by the sodium-potassium pump,
the membrane's high resting permeability to potassium,
and the resulting electrochemical equilibrium for potassium.
State the Nernst and Goldman equations and what they tell us.
The Nernst equation gives the equilibrium potential for a single ion — the membrane
voltage at which the electrical force on that ion exactly balances its
concentration gradient, so there is no net movement.
It states that the equilibrium potential equals R-T over z-F,
multiplied by the natural logarithm of the ratio of the ion's concentration outside
the cell to its concentration inside — where R is the universal gas constant,
T the absolute temperature, z the charge on the ion, and F the Faraday constant.
For potassium this gives about minus ninety millivolts,
and for sodium about plus sixty.
The Goldman equation extends this to the real membrane,
calculating the resting potential from the concentrations of all the permeant ions
together, each weighted by the membrane's permeability to it.
Because the resting membrane is mainly permeable to potassium,
the resting potential lies close to potassium's equilibrium potential.
So the Nernst equation gives a single ion's equilibrium potential from its
concentration ratio, and the Goldman equation gives the actual membrane potential
by weighting all permeant ions by permeability — explaining why the resting
potential sits near that of potassium.
Describe the action potential and its phases.
The action potential is a rapid, transient,
all-or-none reversal of the membrane potential that propagates along an excitable
cell, the basis of electrical signalling. It begins when a stimulus depolarises the
membrane to a threshold, around minus fifty-five millivolts.
At threshold, voltage-gated sodium channels open rapidly,
and sodium rushes into the cell down its electrochemical gradient,
causing rapid depolarisation that overshoots to a positive value,
around plus thirty millivolts.
The sodium channels then inactivate, halting the inflow,
while voltage-gated potassium channels open more slowly,
and potassium leaves the cell, repolarising it towards rest.
The continued potassium efflux briefly drives the potential below rest — the
hyperpolarisation, or undershoot — before the resting state is restored.
The whole event lasts a millisecond or two in nerve.
So the action potential is an all-or-none cycle:
depolarisation to threshold opens voltage-gated sodium channels for a rapid
sodium-driven upstroke, then sodium inactivation and a slower potassium efflux
repolarise the membrane, with a brief hyperpolarisation — a stereotyped sequence of
voltage-gated channel activity.
Describe the appearance of the action potential when plotted,
and the refractory periods.
Plotted as membrane potential in millivolts on the vertical axis against time in
milliseconds on the horizontal axis, the action potential is a characteristic spike.
From the resting baseline near minus seventy millivolts,
there is first a slow rise to threshold; then a steep,
almost vertical upstroke overshooting to about plus thirty millivolts;
then a slightly slower downstroke back through zero;
and a brief dip below the baseline — the after-hyperpolarisation — before returning
to rest.
The refractory periods accompany this. During the absolute refractory period,
covering the upstroke and much of repolarisation,
no second action potential can be triggered however strong the stimulus,
because the sodium channels are inactivated.
During the following relative refractory period,
a stronger-than-normal stimulus can trigger an action potential,
as channels recover and the membrane is hyperpolarised.
These periods limit the firing frequency and ensure the action potential travels in
one direction.
So the action potential is a spike — slow rise to threshold, steep upstroke,
repolarisation and after-hyperpolarisation — with an absolute refractory period
preventing any second response and a relative refractory period requiring a larger
stimulus, ensuring unidirectional, frequency-limited firing.
How does the action potential propagate along an axon?
The action potential propagates by sequentially depolarising adjacent regions of
membrane to threshold.
When one region depolarises, local circuit currents flow to the adjacent resting
membrane, depolarising it to threshold and triggering an action potential there,
and so the impulse moves along; the refractory period behind it ensures it travels
in one direction only.
The manner of propagation depends on myelination.
In unmyelinated fibres, conduction is continuous,
the action potential being regenerated at every point along the membrane,
which is relatively slow.
In myelinated fibres, the myelin sheath, formed by Schwann cells,
insulates the axon except at the regularly spaced gaps, the nodes of Ranvier,
where the voltage-gated sodium channels are concentrated;
the impulse therefore jumps from node to node — saltatory conduction — which is
much faster and more energy-efficient.
So the action potential propagates by local currents depolarising the adjacent
membrane to threshold, unidirectionally because of the refractory period,
either continuously in unmyelinated fibres or, far faster,
by jumping between the nodes of Ranvier in myelinated fibres — saltatory conduction.
What factors affect conduction velocity?
Conduction velocity — the speed at which the action potential travels — is
determined chiefly by two structural factors and influenced by others.
The first is myelination: myelinated fibres conduct far faster than unmyelinated
ones of the same size, because saltatory conduction lets the impulse jump between
nodes rather than be regenerated continuously.
The second is the diameter of the fibre: larger-diameter axons conduct faster,
because their lower internal resistance allows local currents to spread further and
depolarise more distant membrane more quickly.
Together these explain the classification of nerve fibres by speed.
Temperature also affects velocity, cooling slowing conduction,
which is relevant to nerve blockade and hypothermia.
So conduction velocity is increased by myelination, through saltatory conduction,
and by a larger fibre diameter, through reduced internal resistance,
and is slowed by cooling — the basis of nerve-fibre classification and relevant to
regional anaesthesia and temperature.
What is the relevance of the action potential to anaesthesia?
The action potential is central to anaesthesia,
above all through the local anaesthetics,
which act by blocking the voltage-gated sodium channels responsible for its
upstroke; by preventing sodium entry they raise the threshold,
slow the rate of rise, and ultimately prevent the action potential from being
generated or propagated, abolishing conduction in the nerve and so producing
anaesthesia.
Their action depends on the channel state and on the ionisation governed by pH,
and smaller and more rapidly firing fibres are blocked more readily.
The ionic basis also explains why disturbances of plasma potassium and calcium,
and of temperature, alter excitability and are relevant perioperatively —
hyperkalaemia and hypocalcaemia affecting the resting potential and threshold.
So the action potential is directly relevant to anaesthesia through the local
anaesthetics, which block voltage-gated sodium channels to abolish conduction,
and through the effects of potassium,
calcium and temperature on excitability — the ionic mechanisms of the action
potential underlying nerve block and the consequences of electrolyte disturbance.
Pull it together: relate the ionic mechanisms to the electrical behaviour of
excitable cells.
I would relate them through the central principle that the electrical behaviour of
excitable cells arises from the controlled movement of ions across a selectively
permeable membrane.
The sodium-potassium pump establishes the gradients — potassium in, sodium out;
at rest, the membrane's high potassium permeability sets the resting potential near
potassium's Nernst equilibrium, predicted by the Goldman equation.
When a stimulus reaches threshold, voltage-gated sodium channels open for the rapid
depolarising upstroke, then inactivate while potassium channels repolarise the
membrane, producing the all-or-none action potential,
with refractory periods ensuring unidirectional, frequency-limited firing.
The impulse propagates by local currents, fast and saltatory in myelinated fibres.
These same channels and gradients are the targets and modifiers of anaesthetic
drugs and electrolyte disturbance.
So the electrical behaviour of excitable cells — the resting potential,
the action potential, its propagation,
and its modification by drugs and electrolytes — all follow from ion gradients
maintained by the pump and the gated, selective permeability of the membrane,
a unifying ionic basis described by the Nernst and Goldman equations.
Derive, in words, what the Nernst equation tells us, with worked values.
The Nernst equation arises from the balance, for a single permeant ion,
between the chemical force of its concentration gradient and the electrical force
of the membrane potential.
At the equilibrium potential, these two forces are equal and opposite,
so there is no net movement of the ion.
The equation states that this equilibrium potential equals R-T over z-F,
multiplied by the natural logarithm of the ratio of the ion's concentration outside
to inside — R being the gas constant, T the absolute temperature,
z the ionic charge, and F the Faraday constant.
At body temperature, for a singly charged positive ion,
the constants simplify so that the equilibrium potential is about sixty-one
millivolts times the logarithm to base ten of the concentration ratio.
For potassium, high inside, this gives about minus ninety millivolts; for sodium,
high outside, about plus sixty; for calcium, even more positive.
So the Nernst equation gives the equilibrium potential at which the electrical and
chemical forces on an ion balance, equal to R-T over z-F times the natural
logarithm of the concentration ratio — about minus ninety millivolts for potassium
and plus sixty for sodium — defining the voltages towards which each ion drives the
membrane.
Describe the states of the voltage-gated sodium channel.
The voltage-gated sodium channel exists in three states,
and the cycling between them shapes the action potential and the refractory period.
At the resting potential the channel is in the resting,
closed state — closed but able to open.
When the membrane depolarises to threshold, the channel rapidly opens,
its activation gate swinging open to allow sodium to rush in, driving the upstroke.
Within a millisecond, a separate inactivation gate closes,
putting the channel into the inactivated state — closed and, crucially,
unable to be reopened by further depolarisation;
this inactivation halts the sodium current and underlies the absolute refractory
period.
The channel only returns to the resting,
openable state once the membrane has repolarised, recovering from inactivation.
So the voltage-gated sodium channel cycles through resting (closed but available),
open (during the upstroke), and inactivated (closed and unavailable) states;
the inactivated state stops the sodium current and causes the absolute refractory
period, and recovery requires repolarisation — a cycle central to the action
potential and to use-dependent local-anaesthetic block.
How does plasma potassium affect the resting membrane potential and excitability?
Because the resting membrane potential is set largely by potassium and lies close
to potassium's Nernst equilibrium, changes in the plasma potassium concentration
shift it, with important effects on excitability.
In hyperkalaemia, the raised extracellular potassium reduces the potassium
concentration gradient, so by the Nernst relationship the potassium equilibrium
potential, and hence the resting potential,
becomes less negative — the membrane depolarises towards threshold.
Modest depolarisation initially increases excitability,
but more marked hyperkalaemia causes sustained depolarisation that inactivates the
sodium channels, so the cell becomes unexcitable — dangerous in cardiac muscle,
causing the characteristic electrocardiographic changes and ultimately asystole.
In hypokalaemia, the resting potential becomes more negative,
hyperpolarising the cell, which reduces excitability and predisposes to arrhythmias
and weakness.
So plasma potassium directly sets the resting potential through its Nernst
equilibrium: hyperkalaemia depolarises the membrane,
initially raising then abolishing excitability by inactivating sodium channels,
while hypokalaemia hyperpolarises it — effects underlying the cardiac dangers of
potassium disturbance.
How does plasma calcium affect neuromuscular excitability?
Plasma calcium affects excitability not by setting the resting potential but by
altering the threshold for the action potential,
through its effect on the voltage-gated sodium channels.
Calcium ions bind to the channel and stabilise it, raising the threshold.
In hypocalcaemia, this stabilising effect is reduced,
so the threshold falls closer to the resting potential and the membrane becomes
hyperexcitable, firing more readily — manifesting clinically as tetany,
with carpopedal spasm, paraesthesiae, laryngospasm and, in the heart,
a prolonged QT interval.
In hypercalcaemia, the stabilising effect is increased,
raising the threshold and reducing excitability, causing lethargy,
weakness and cardiac effects.
This is why calcium disturbance produces neuromuscular and cardiac symptoms,
and why calcium is given to stabilise the myocardium in hyperkalaemia.
So plasma calcium sets the threshold for excitation by stabilising sodium channels:
hypocalcaemia lowers the threshold and causes hyperexcitability and tetany,
while hypercalcaemia raises it and reduces excitability — a distinct mechanism from
potassium's effect on the resting potential.
Describe the cable properties of the axon and the length and time constants.
The cable properties describe how a local change in membrane potential spreads
passively along an axon, like current along a leaky electrical cable,
and they determine how effectively a signal propagates before being actively
regenerated. Two constants characterise this.
The length constant, or space constant,
is the distance over which a passive change in potential decays to a defined
fraction of its value; a longer length constant means the signal spreads further,
favoured by a high membrane resistance — as myelin provides — and a low internal
resistance, as a large diameter provides, both increasing conduction velocity.
The time constant is the time taken for the membrane potential to change to a
defined fraction of its final value in response to a current,
determined by the membrane resistance and capacitance;
a shorter time constant allows faster changes.
So the cable properties govern passive signal spread: the length constant,
longer with high membrane and low internal resistance,
sets how far a signal spreads, and the time constant,
set by membrane resistance and capacitance,
sets how fast the potential changes — physical properties explaining why
myelination and large diameter speed conduction.
Describe the strength-duration relationship for stimulating excitable tissue.
The strength-duration relationship describes the combination of stimulus strength
and stimulus duration needed to excite a nerve or muscle,
and it underlies electrical stimulation in monitoring and pacing.
A stimulus must be both strong enough and long enough to bring the membrane to
threshold; a stronger stimulus needs less time, and a weaker one more.
Plotted as stimulus strength on the vertical axis against duration on the
horizontal axis, the relationship is a curve falling steeply then flattening into a
hyperbola. Two points define it.
The rheobase is the minimum stimulus strength that will excite the tissue however
long it is applied — the flat asymptote of the curve.
The chronaxie is the stimulus duration required when the strength is twice the
rheobase, a measure of excitability that is shorter for more excitable tissue.
So the strength-duration curve relates the stimulus strength and duration needed to
reach threshold as a falling hyperbola,
characterised by the rheobase — the minimum effective strength — and the chronaxie
— the duration at twice the rheobase — principles underlying nerve stimulators and
cardiac pacing.
Explain in detail how local anaesthetics block the action potential.
Local anaesthetics abolish the action potential by blocking the voltage-gated
sodium channels responsible for its depolarising upstroke.
The local anaesthetic, a weak base,
must cross the nerve membrane in its unionised lipid-soluble form, then,
within the axoplasm, it is the ionised form that binds the receptor on the inner
aspect of the sodium channel, occluding it.
By blocking sodium entry it prevents depolarisation reaching threshold,
slowing and then abolishing the action potential and so conduction.
The block is use-dependent, or phasic:
because the drug binds more avidly to the open and inactivated states,
channels that are firing frequently are blocked more readily,
so active nerves are blocked preferentially.
The dependence on the unionised form to cross explains why local anaesthetics are
less effective in acidic, infected tissue, where more drug is ionised.
So local anaesthetics block voltage-gated sodium channels — crossing the membrane
unionised, then binding from within in their ionised form — preventing
depolarisation to threshold, with a use-dependent preference for active channels,
and reduced efficacy in acidic tissue, abolishing conduction to produce anaesthesia.
What is the effect of myelin and of demyelination on conduction?
Myelin is the lipid insulating sheath,
formed by Schwann cells in the periphery and oligodendrocytes centrally,
wrapped around the axon and interrupted at the nodes of Ranvier.
It speeds conduction by two means: it insulates the internodal membrane,
increasing its resistance and reducing its capacitance so that local currents
spread efficiently to the next node, lengthening the cable length constant;
and because the sodium channels are concentrated at the nodes,
the action potential is regenerated only there,
jumping from node to node — saltatory conduction — which is far faster and more
energy-efficient than continuous conduction.
Demyelination, as in multiple sclerosis or Guillain-Barré syndrome,
destroys this insulation, so conduction slows, becomes unreliable,
or fails entirely, producing the neurological deficits of these diseases,
with implications for anaesthesia including altered responses and autonomic
involvement.
So myelin speeds conduction by insulating the internode and confining regeneration
to the nodes, giving fast saltatory conduction,
while demyelination slows or blocks conduction,
causing the deficits of demyelinating disease and carrying anaesthetic implications
— the physical basis of why myelination matters.
Summarise the ionic and physical basis of excitability.
I would summarise excitability as arising from the interplay of ionic gradients,
selective and gated permeability, and the physical cable properties of the cell.
The sodium-potassium pump establishes the gradients — potassium in, sodium out;
at rest, the high potassium permeability sets the resting potential near
potassium's Nernst equilibrium, modified by other ions per the Goldman equation.
Excitation occurs when depolarisation to threshold opens voltage-gated sodium
channels for the regenerative upstroke,
followed by their inactivation and potassium-driven repolarisation,
the all-or-none action potential, with refractory periods from sodium inactivation.
The signal spreads according to the cable properties — length and time constants —
fastest where myelination and large diameter favour them.
Plasma potassium sets the resting potential and calcium the threshold,
so their disturbance alters excitability,
and local anaesthetics block the sodium channel.
So excitability rests on pump-maintained ionic gradients,
the gated selective permeability that generates the resting and action potentials,
and the cable properties governing propagation — a unified ionic and physical basis
modified by electrolytes, temperature and anaesthetic drugs.
Explain the Goldman equation and why the resting potential is not exactly
potassium's equilibrium.
The Nernst equation gives the equilibrium potential for one ion in isolation,
but the real membrane is permeable to several ions at once,
so its potential is a weighted compromise, described by the Goldman,
or Goldman-Hodgkin-Katz, equation.
This calculates the membrane potential from the concentrations of the principal
permeant ions — potassium, sodium and chloride — each weighted by the membrane's
permeability to it, so that the ion to which the membrane is most permeable
dominates.
At rest, the membrane is far more permeable to potassium than to sodium — by
perhaps a hundred to one — so the resting potential lies close to potassium's
equilibrium of about minus ninety millivolts;
but the small but finite sodium permeability allows a little sodium in,
making the resting potential slightly less negative than potassium's equilibrium,
at around minus seventy millivolts in a neurone.
So the Goldman equation gives the membrane potential as the permeability-weighted
balance of all permeant ions; the resting potential sits near potassium's
equilibrium because potassium permeability dominates,
but the small sodium permeability draws it slightly positive of that value —
explaining why the resting potential is close to, but not exactly,
the potassium equilibrium.
What is the contribution of the electrogenic sodium-potassium pump to the resting
potential?
The sodium-potassium pump contributes to the resting membrane potential in two
ways, one indirect and major, one direct and minor.
Its principal, indirect contribution is to establish and maintain the ionic
gradients — high internal potassium,
low internal sodium — that are the very basis of the resting potential and of the
equilibrium potentials; without the pump these gradients would dissipate and the
potential collapse.
Its direct contribution arises because the pump is electrogenic:
it extrudes three sodium ions for every two potassium it imports,
a net movement of one positive charge out of the cell per cycle,
which itself makes the interior slightly more negative — contributing a few
millivolts to the resting potential.
This direct electrogenic contribution is small in most cells but becomes more
significant where the pump is very active.
So the sodium-potassium pump contributes to the resting potential chiefly
indirectly, by maintaining the ionic gradients on which it depends,
and directly but to a small degree through its electrogenic extrusion of net
positive charge — the indirect role being indispensable and the direct one a minor
added negativity.
Describe threshold, local responses and electrotonic potentials.
Not every depolarisation produces an action potential;
the response depends on whether the threshold is reached.
A small, subthreshold stimulus produces only a passive,
local change in membrane potential — an electrotonic potential — that is graded
with the stimulus and decays with distance according to the cable properties,
not propagating actively.
As the depolarisation approaches threshold,
some voltage-gated sodium channels begin to open,
producing a small active local response that adds to the passive one,
but still insufficient to regenerate.
The threshold is the critical level of depolarisation — around minus fifty-five
millivolts — at which the sodium entry becomes self-reinforcing:
the inward sodium current exceeds the outward potassium current,
and the regenerative, all-or-none upstroke is triggered.
Below threshold, responses are local and decremental; at and above it,
the full action potential fires.
So a subthreshold stimulus produces only a graded,
decaying electrotonic potential and a small local response,
whereas reaching the threshold — where inward sodium current becomes
self-reinforcing — triggers the regenerative all-or-none action potential,
the distinction between passive local responses and the propagated impulse.
Describe the voltage-gated potassium channels and their role in repolarisation.
While the voltage-gated sodium channels drive the depolarising upstroke,
the voltage-gated potassium channels are chiefly responsible for repolarisation.
These channels also open in response to the depolarisation,
but more slowly than the sodium channels — they are delayed — so their opening is
timed to follow the upstroke.
As they open, potassium flows out of the cell down its electrochemical gradient,
carrying positive charge out and so repolarising the membrane back towards the
resting potential; this outward potassium current,
combined with the inactivation of the sodium channels,
terminates the action potential.
Because the potassium channels are slow both to open and to close,
their continued opening after the membrane has returned to rest carries the
potential briefly below the resting level — the after-hyperpolarisation — until
they close.
These channels, the delayed rectifiers,
are distinct from the leak channels that set the resting potential.
So the voltage-gated, delayed potassium channels open slowly during the action
potential and repolarise the membrane by carrying potassium out,
their delayed closure causing the after-hyperpolarisation — complementing the
sodium channels by ending the action potential and resetting the membrane.
What is accommodation?
Accommodation is the phenomenon whereby a slowly rising depolarising stimulus may
fail to excite a nerve, even though it eventually reaches a level that,
if applied rapidly, would readily trigger an action potential.
It occurs because a slow depolarisation gives the voltage-gated sodium channels
time to inactivate progressively as the potential rises,
and allows the voltage-gated potassium channels time to open,
so that by the time the depolarisation reaches what would be threshold,
too few sodium channels remain available,
and the increased potassium efflux opposes excitation — the threshold itself
effectively rises.
The nerve has thus accommodated to the slowly changing stimulus.
This is why a stimulus must rise sufficiently quickly to excite,
and it relates to the rheobase and to the minimal gradient of current needed.
So accommodation is the failure of a slowly rising stimulus to excite,
because the gradual depolarisation inactivates sodium channels and opens potassium
channels, raising the threshold faster than the stimulus rises — a property
requiring stimuli to change rapidly enough, and relevant to electrical stimulation.
How does temperature affect nerve conduction?
Temperature affects nerve conduction because the underlying processes — the gating
of ion channels and the ionic currents — are temperature-dependent,
like other biochemical and physical processes, with a Q-ten effect.
Cooling slows the opening and closing of the voltage-gated channels and reduces the
ionic currents, so it slows the rate of rise of the action potential and reduces
the conduction velocity; sufficient cooling can block conduction entirely,
which is the basis of the analgesia produced by cold and of cryoanalgesia.
Warming has the opposite effect, speeding conduction up to a point.
This temperature dependence is clinically relevant:
hypothermia slows nerve conduction and can prolong the effects of neuromuscular
block and alter monitoring, and local cooling contributes to nerve block.
So temperature affects nerve conduction through its effect on channel gating and
ionic currents: cooling slows the action potential and conduction velocity and can
block conduction — the basis of cold-induced analgesia — while warming speeds it,
a dependence relevant to hypothermia and to neuromuscular monitoring.
Why is the action potential described as all-or-none,
and what does this imply for coding?
The action potential is all-or-none in that,
once the depolarisation reaches threshold,
a full action potential of fixed amplitude and form is generated,
regardless of how much the threshold is exceeded; and if threshold is not reached,
no action potential occurs at all.
This is because the upstroke is a regenerative,
self-reinforcing process — the opening of sodium channels causing further
depolarisation and more opening — that always proceeds to completion once
triggered, its size determined by the ionic gradients, not by the stimulus.
A larger stimulus therefore does not produce a larger action potential.
This raises the question of how the nervous system encodes stimulus intensity,
and the answer is by frequency coding:
a stronger stimulus is signalled not by larger action potentials but by a higher
frequency of firing, and by the recruitment of more fibres.
So the action potential is all-or-none because its regenerative upstroke always
proceeds fully once threshold is reached,
its size set by ionic gradients not stimulus strength;
consequently the nervous system codes intensity by the frequency of firing and the
number of fibres recruited, not by action-potential amplitude.
Summarise the sequence of channel events in a single action potential.
I would summarise the action potential as a precisely timed sequence of
voltage-gated channel events on the foundation of the resting state.
At rest, the membrane potential, set near potassium's equilibrium by potassium leak
channels and the maintained gradients,
holds the sodium channels closed but available.
A stimulus depolarises the membrane to threshold,
at which point the voltage-gated sodium channels open rapidly and regeneratively,
and sodium influx drives the steep upstroke,
overshooting towards sodium's equilibrium.
Within about a millisecond the sodium channels inactivate, halting the influx,
while the slower voltage-gated potassium channels open;
potassium efflux then repolarises the membrane.
The continued potassium efflux briefly hyperpolarises the membrane below rest — the
after-hyperpolarisation — until the potassium channels close and the sodium
channels recover from inactivation, restoring the resting state.
So a single action potential is the sequence: resting state,
depolarisation to threshold, regenerative sodium-channel opening for the upstroke,
sodium inactivation with delayed potassium-channel opening for repolarisation,
after-hyperpolarisation, and recovery — a stereotyped cycle of sodium and potassium
channel gating underlying all nervous signalling.
Describe the after-potentials that follow the action potential.
Following the main spike of the action potential,
the membrane potential does not return instantly and smoothly to rest but shows
after-potentials, reflecting the tail of the channel activity.
The principal one is the after-hyperpolarisation,
sometimes called the positive after-potential,
in which the membrane is transiently more negative than the resting potential.
This arises because the voltage-gated potassium channels that opened to repolarise
the membrane are slow to close, so potassium efflux continues briefly even after
the resting potential is reached, driving the potential towards potassium's
equilibrium, which is more negative than rest, until the channels finally close.
During this after-hyperpolarisation the membrane is further from threshold,
contributing to the latter part of the relative refractory period and limiting the
firing frequency.
So the action potential is followed by an after-hyperpolarisation,
caused by the delayed closure of the voltage-gated potassium channels allowing
continued potassium efflux, which carries the potential transiently below rest —
prolonging the relative refractory period and helping to set the maximum rate of
firing.
Compare the nerve and cardiac action potentials.
The nerve and cardiac action potentials share the principle of voltage-gated ionic
currents but differ markedly in form and duration, suiting their functions.
The nerve action potential is brief, lasting a millisecond or two:
a rapid sodium-driven upstroke and a prompt potassium-driven repolarisation,
allowing rapid, repeated firing.
The ventricular cardiac action potential is far longer,
lasting some two to three hundred milliseconds,
because after the rapid sodium-driven upstroke there is a sustained plateau phase,
maintained by an inward calcium current through slow voltage-gated calcium channels
balancing potassium efflux, before repolarisation.
This long plateau, and the calcium it admits, serve the heart:
the calcium contributes to contraction,
and the prolonged action potential produces a long refractory period that prevents
tetanic contraction and allows the heart to fill and pump rhythmically.
So the nerve action potential is brief, a simple sodium-up,
potassium-down spike permitting rapid firing,
whereas the cardiac action potential is prolonged by a calcium-dependent plateau,
admitting calcium for contraction and giving a long refractory period that prevents
tetany — the form of each matched to its function.
What is the energy cost of electrical signalling?
Electrical signalling, though the ionic movements of a single action potential are
tiny relative to the gradients, carries a substantial energy cost overall,
because the gradients must be continuously restored.
Each action potential allows a small influx of sodium and efflux of potassium,
slightly degrading the gradients; restoring them requires the sodium-potassium pump
to pump these ions back, consuming adenosine triphosphate.
Likewise, maintaining the resting potential against the constant leak of ions
requires continuous pumping.
Because the brain is electrically very active,
with vast numbers of neurones firing and maintaining their potentials and reuptake
of transmitters, it is metabolically expensive,
consuming around a fifth of the body's resting energy and oxygen despite its modest
mass, and is correspondingly vulnerable to any interruption of its oxygen and
glucose supply.
So electrical signalling is energetically costly because the ionic gradients
degraded by each action potential and by continuous leak must be restored by the
adenosine-triphosphate-consuming sodium-potassium pump — making the electrically
active brain a major energy consumer and acutely dependent on its oxygen and
glucose supply.
What is the role of voltage-gated calcium channels in excitable cells?
Although the nerve action potential is driven by sodium and potassium,
voltage-gated calcium channels have crucial roles in excitable cells,
opening in response to depolarisation to admit calcium down its very steep
electrochemical gradient.
Their most important role is at the nerve terminal,
where the arriving action potential opens them,
and the calcium that enters triggers the release of neurotransmitter — so they
couple the electrical signal to chemical transmission.
In cardiac and smooth muscle they carry the inward current of the action-potential
plateau and admit the calcium that triggers or effects contraction,
coupling excitation to contraction.
They exist in several subtypes with different properties and distributions,
and they are the targets of the calcium-channel-blocking drugs used in
cardiovascular disease.
So voltage-gated calcium channels, opening on depolarisation to admit calcium,
couple the action potential to neurotransmitter release at nerve terminals and to
contraction in cardiac and smooth muscle,
and are important drug targets — the means by which the electrical signal is
translated into secretion and contraction.
How are membrane potentials and action potentials recorded?
Membrane and action potentials are studied by recording the voltage across the
membrane, by methods that have been fundamental to understanding excitability.
The classical intracellular recording uses a fine microelectrode inserted through
the membrane into the cell, measuring the potential of the inside relative to a
reference outside; this directly records the resting potential and the full form of
the action potential, and was how the squid giant axon was studied.
The patch-clamp technique, a refinement,
seals a glass pipette onto a small patch of membrane,
allowing the currents through even a single ion channel to be recorded,
and the voltage-clamp variant holds the membrane at a set potential to measure the
currents flowing — the methods that revealed channel behaviour.
Clinically, extracellular recordings detect the summed activity of many cells — the
electrocardiogram from the heart, the electroencephalogram from the brain,
and nerve conduction studies and electromyography.
So membrane and action potentials are recorded intracellularly by microelectrode
for the single cell, by patch- and voltage-clamp for individual channel currents,
and extracellularly — as the electrocardiogram,
electroencephalogram and nerve conduction studies — for the summed activity of many
cells, the basis of both research and clinical electrophysiology.
Thank you. A clear and complete account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, The resting membrane potential (inside negative; ~−70 mV in neurones,
~−90 mV in muscle) is generated by ionic gradients maintained by the Na/K pump,
the membrane's high resting permeability to Second,
The Nernst equation gives a single ion's equilibrium potential from its
concentration ratio (E = RT/zF × ln[out]/[in]);
the Goldman equation gives the actual membrane potential by weighting all permeant
ions by permeability — so the resting potential sits close to potassium's (~−90 mV).
Third, The action potential is an all-or-none cycle:
depolarisation to threshold (~−55 mV) opens voltage-gated sodium channels for a
rapid sodium-driven upstroke (overshoot to ~+30 mV),
then sodium inactivation and slower potassium efflux repolarise the membrane with a
brief after-hyperpolarisation.
Fourth, Absolute (sodium channels inactivated — no second response possible) and
relative (larger stimulus needed) refractory periods limit firing frequency and
ensure unidirectional propagation; conduction is continuous in unmyelinated fibres
and faster saltatory (node-to-node) in myelinated fibres,
velocity increased by myelination and larger diameter and slowed by cooling.
Fifth, The action potential is central to anaesthesia:
local anaesthetics block voltage-gated sodium channels to raise threshold,
slow the upstroke and abolish conduction (state- and pH-dependent,
smaller/faster-firing fibres blocked first), and disturbances of potassium,
calcium and temperature alter excitability — the ionic basis underlying nerve block
and electrolyte effects.
Thank you. That concludes the station.